Jerry Falwell, in full Jerry Laymon Falwell, Sr., (born August 11, 1933, Lynchburg, Virginia, U.S.—died May 15, 2007, Lynchburg), American religious leader, televangelist, and founder of the Moral Majority, a political organization for the promotion of conservative social values.

Although his grandfather and father were atheists, Falwell accepted Jesus Christ in 1952, perhaps through the influence of his mother, a devout Christian. A good student and athlete—he turned down the opportunity to play professional baseball—Falwell entered Lynchburg College but later transferred to Baptist Bible College in Springfield, Missouri, and graduated in 1956. In that year he founded Thomas Road Baptist Church in Lynchburg; the congregation grew from some 35 members to more than 20,000 by the time of Falwell’s death. In 1956 Falwell also began broadcasting his sermons on a radio program, the “Old-Time Gospel Hour.” Six months later the program began appearing on a local television network; eventually it went into national and even international syndication and claimed more than 50 million regular viewers.

In 1971 Falwell founded Lynchburg Bible College—later Liberty University, a fundamentalist Christian university—which he led until his death. In the late 1980s he unsuccessfully sought to revive the PTL (Praise the Lord) Club, the conservative Christian organization and television network of the disgraced televangelist Jim Bakker. Falwell advocated a conservative Christian faith and condemned what he perceived as the sinfulness and godlessness of contemporary society. A segregationist in his early years, he later abandoned that view. He opposed abortion, feminism, gay rights, and other causes associated with the social and cultural transformations of the 1960s and ’70s.

A successful minister, Falwell was perhaps best known for his political activism and the founding in 1979 of the Moral Majority, which he characterized as pro-family and pro-American. The organization, which quickly grew to several million members, was credited with playing an important role in the election of Republican Ronald Reagan as president in 1980; it remained a force in American politics during the first half of the 1980s but was disbanded in 1989 after Falwell declared that it had accomplished its mission.

In the 1990s, despite fading somewhat in the public eye, Falwell was an outspoken critic of the Democratic Party and especially of Democratic Pres. Bill Clinton. Throughout his career Falwell was a staunch supporter of the State of Israel and of the Republican Party; his Liberty University became an important stop for Republican presidential candidates in the early 21st century. In 2004, buoyed by the electoral victories of George W. Bush, Falwell founded the Faith and Values Coalition—which became the Moral Majority Coalition—as a successor to the Moral Majority.

Throughout his career Falwell engendered controversy with remarks that many Americans perceived as intolerant or bigoted. He declared that AIDS was a divine punishment for homosexuality; he blamed “abortionists,” gays and lesbians, feminists, and others for the September 11, 2001, attacks on the United States (a statement he subsequently retracted); he identified Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, as a terrorist; and he asserted that the Antichrist was a currently living Jewish male. Despite the hostility he sometimes provoked, Falwell was largely responsible for making American Christian conservatives politically active, and he had a marked impact on other aspects of American religious and political life in the late 20th century.