Joshua David Hawley (born December 31, 1979) is an American politician, lawyer, and former professor who has served as the junior United States senator from Missouri since 2019. A member of the Republican Party, Hawley served as the 42nd attorney general of Missouri from 2017 to 2019, before defeating two-term Democratic incumbent Senator Claire McCaskill in the 2018 election.

Born in Springdale, Arkansas, to a banker and a teacher, Hawley graduated from Stanford University in 2002 and Yale Law School in 2006. He was a law clerk to Tenth Circuit Judge Michael W. McConnell and Chief Justice John Roberts and then worked as a lawyer, first in private practice, from 2008 to 2011, and then for the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, from 2011 to 2015. Before becoming Missouri Attorney General, he was also a post graduate intern at St Paul's School in London, an associate professor at the University of Missouri School of Law, and a faculty member of the conservative Blackstone Legal Fellowship.

As Missouri attorney general, Hawley initiated several high-profile lawsuits and investigations, including a lawsuit against the Affordable Care Act, an investigation into Missouri governor Eric Greitens, and a lawsuit and investigation into companies associated with the opioid epidemic. In the Senate, Hawley became widely known for his criticism of Big Tech, as well as for his criticism of the Chinese government and his support for an independent Hong Kong.

In December 2020, Hawley provoked an intense political backlash after he became the first senator to announce he would object to the certification of Joe Biden's victory in the 2020 presidential election. Because Hawley led Senate efforts to obstruct the Electoral College vote count[3][4][5][6][7] and rallied supporters of the baseless conspiracy theory that motivated the storming of the U.S. Capitol,[8][9][10][11][12] figures from across the political spectrum argued that he was morally responsible for the riot and the deaths it caused, and called on him to resign or be expelled from the Senate.